Licensing 
==========

***[Back to Start Page](EN00000_00_00_00_Start.md)***

***(under consruction)***


Licencing the projects is a very crucial point which must be considered
very seriously before proposal. The following chapter gives non-binding
recommendations.

Introduction
------------

To understand licensing in the field of open-source projects it is
useful to work out the two major categories of open-source licenses:

-   Permissive licenses: Code with a permissive license can be freely
    copied, modified, and published, and the only restriction is that
    the license must be preserved. The MIT and Apache licenses are the
    most common modern permissive licenses; older permissive licenses
    include the various forms of the BSD license.

-   Copyleft licenses: They are stricter. The most common copyleft
    license is the GPL which allows the free copy and modification the
    code, but if modified versions or bundle with other code are
    published, the modified version or complete bundle must also be
    licensed with the GPL.

To get a high-level view of the open-source licensing space, and the
details of individual licenses, it is recommended to read[^1].

Evaluations of common repositories show the following distribution of
the two licencing areas [^2][^3]:

-   a 2015 survey of GitHub repositories found that \~ 55 % used a
    permissive license and \~ 20 % a copyleft license.

-   a 2020 survey of CRAN found that \~ 15 % used a permissive license
    and \~ 70 % use a copyleft license.

For more details about licensing “Licensing R” by Colin Fay is
recommended.

Definitions
-----------

### Copyright holder 

The copyright holder (or holders) are the people who own the underlying
copyright on the code and are hence the only people who are allowed to
choose (or later change) the license. There are three main cases:

-   If a single person wrote the project solely, this person is
    copyright holder.

-   If an employee wrote the code for an employer, the employer is the
    copyright holder.

-   If the project was generated within a contract work, the appointee
    (single person or company) is the copyright holder unless the
    contract specifically describes otherwise.

-   This means that the appointee who writes a project is responsible to
    get the employer to approve the open-source license.

Note that if multiple persons or legal entities have contributed to the
project, there will be multiple copyright holders: each person or
company will hold the copyright for their specific contribution.

### Licences

The following list shoes the important licenses roughly ordered from
most permissive to least permissive:

-   The MIT license is the most permissive license only requiring that
    you keep the copyright and license notice.

-   The Apache License is similar to the MIT license, but it also
    includes an explicit patent grant. Patents are another component of
    intellectual property distinct from copyrights, and some
    organisations also care about protection from patent claims.

-   The LGPL is a little weaker than the GPL, allowing to bundle LPGL
    code using any license for the larger work.

-   The GPL: The GPL has two major versions, GPLv2 and GPLv3, and they
    are not compatible (i.e., one cannot bundle GPLv2 and GPLv3 code in
    the same project). To avoid this problem, it is generally
    recommended to license the project as GPL &gt;=2 or GPL &gt;= 3 so
    that future versions of the GPL license also apply to your code.

-   The AGPL defines distribution to include providing a service over a
    network, so that if you use AGPL code to provide a web service, all
    bundled code must also be open-sourced. Because this is a
    considerably broader claim than the GPL, many companies expressly
    forbid the use of AGPL software.

There are many other licenses available. A comprehensive list can be
found at [^4] and a full list at [^5].

Nevertheless, projects proposed to DKE/DIN and CEN/CENELEC can only be
chosen from the list in Annex 1.

### Relicensing 

Relicensing is possible if the following conditions are fulfilled:

-   The Project must not contain bundled code.

-   All contributors must be informed and must agree.

### Included data 

Open-source licenses are designed specifically to apply to source code,
so if releasing a project that primarily contains data, a different type
of license should be used. For this purpose, the Creative Commons
licenses are suitable:

-   To make the data as freely available as possible, the CC0 license
    should be used. This is a permissive license which is equivalent to
    the MIT license, but applies to data, not code.

-   If attribution is required when someone else uses the data, the
    CC-BY license should be used.

### Foreign code

Many projects include code not written by the author. There are two main
ways this happens:

-   other people might choose to contribute to the project using a pull
    request or similar,

-   or the author might find some code and choose to bundle it.

When someone contributes code to the project using a pull request or
similar, it can be assumed that the contributing author fully agrees
with the license. This is explicit in the GitHub terms of service but is
generally considered to be true regardless of how the code is
contributed.

Note, however, that the author retains copyright of their code, unless a
“contributor license agreement” or CLA for short is used. The primary
advantage of a CLA is that it makes the copyright of the code very
simple, and hence makes it easy to relicense code if needed. This is
most important for dual open-source/commercial projects because it
easily allows for dual licensing where the code is made available to the
world with copyleft license, and made available to paying customers with
a different, more permissive, license.

### Bundled code 

There are three common reasons that code is bundled to a project:

-   Someone else’s CSS or JS library are included in order to create a
    useful and attractive web page or HTML widgets.

-   Wrappers for libraries in different programming languages

-   Small amounts of code from other projects are taken to avoid
    taking dependencies.

Generally, taking a dependency on another package is the right thing to
do because there is no need to worry about licensing, and automatically
fixing is guaranteed. But sometimes bundling is beneficial if only very
small amount of code from a big package is required. Then copying and
pasting it into the project may be the right thing to do.

### License compatibility 

Before someone else’s code is bundled into the project, it is necessary
to check that the bundled license is compatible with the project
license. When distributing code, one can add additional restrictions,
but it is not possible to remove any restrictions, which means that
license compatibility is not symmetric. For example, one can bundle MIT
licensed code in a GPL licensed package, but you cannot bundle GPL
licensed code in an MIT licensed package.

There are main cases to consider:

-   If project license and referred license are the same: Bundling
    **is** possible.

-   If the licenses are MIT or BSD: Bundling **is** possible.

-   If referred code has a copyleft license and the project code has a
    permissive license:

-   Bundling is **not** possible.

> Here an alternative approach must be considered, either looking for
> code with a more permissive license, or putting the external code in a
> separate package.

-   If the code comes from Stack Overflow, it is licensed with the
    Creative Common CC BY-SA license, which is only compatible
    with GPLv3. This means that one need to take extra care when using
    Stack Overflow code in open-source packages [^6]. Learn more
    at https://empirical-software.engineering/blog/so-snippets-in-gh-projects.

-   It is important to note that different versions of the same license
    are not necessarily compatible, e.g., GPLv2 and GPLv3 are
    **not** compatible.

For all other combinations general advice cannot be given. A first
overlook can be found at [^6].

**If the bundled source is not open source. The project is not
considered suitable for the DIN/DKE or CEN/CENELEC open-source
initiative.**

This list is neither comprehensive nor binding in respect to legal
issues. In doubt the project leader must contact their legal department
first.

#### Include in a project

When it is ensured that the licenses are compatible, the code can be
included in the project. When doing so, all existing licenses and
copyright statements must be preserved.

-   If a fragment of another project is included, it is generally best
    to put in its own file and ensure that file has copyright statements
    and license description at the top.

-   If multiple files are included, they should be put in a directory,
    and a LICENSE file in the corresponding directory must be added.

Furthermore, some standard metadata in the Authors entry must be added.
The role of the contributor should be set as cph to declare that the
author is a copyright holder.


***[Back to Start Page](EN00000_00_00_00_Start.md)***

[^1]: https://choosealicense.com

[^2]: https://r-pkgs.org/

[^3]: https://github.blog/2015-03-09-open-source-license-usage-on-github-com/

[^4]: https://choosealicense.com/licenses/

[^5]: https://opensource.org/licenses/alphabetical

[^6]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/License\_compatibility\#Compatibility\_of\_FOSS\_licenses
