Introduction
============

***[Back to Start Page](EN00000_00_00_00_Start.md)***

Executive Summary
-----------------

Technical bodies often wish to provide software or other designs along
with their standards, eg: reference implementations or testing tools,
and yet CEN-CENELEC’s procedures, infrastructure and legal and
commercial arrangements do not facilitate it. It is expected to become
more and more common with time due to an increasingly digital society,
the advantages of the “open” concept such as further enhancing
innovation (as recognized by society generally and the European
Commission’s Joint Research Centre specifically).

The overarching objective of this project is to facilitate the
incorporation open source approaches into CEN-CENELEC’s standardization
activities in order to keep standards relevant in the digital era.

Because this is an innovation project, the project approach will balance
formal guidance with freedom to progressively explore, define, test and
learn. In particular, a requirements analysis exercise must be
undertaken to determine the nature and number of solutions that are
required to address the main needs that have been encountered so far or
that are expected in the future.

The project will deliver a framework for selecting the best solution for
a given situation, and the solutions themselves which will include IT
tools, legal and commercial arrangements and processes and procedures. 2
FTEs of member resources and 0.5 FTEs of CCMC resources will be consumed
over 2 years, as well as 120k€. Rollout to all technical bodies is out
of scope of the project.

If this project is not undertaken, CEN-CENELEC risks not meeting
standard makers’ needs, which might lead them to go elsewhere for their
standard creation needs, which might reduce the value of CEN-CENELEC’s
deliverables, thereby reducing revenue.

Rationale
=========

Rationale
---------

CEN-CENELEC’s standards are becoming increasingly digital-related, eg:
by describing data elements that must be provided, file formats, etc.
Although the standard itself may not be software, technical bodies often
wish to provide software or other designs along with it, eg: reference
implementations which illustrate how the standard may be applied or
testing tools which allows users to confirm whether what they’ve built
conforms to the standard. Technical bodies currently encounter several
challenges when considering providing software or other designs along
with their standard, eg:

-   There is currently no approved way to include other file types along
    with the Word/PDF/XML document.

-   No development tools or infrastructure are provided, ie: the
    technical body needs to find these tools themselves.

-   The creation and maintenance cycles may be too slow, eg: they would
    like to fix bugs or add features within a few weeks rather than
    following a lengthy amendment cycle.

-   Designs such as open source code must generally be modified by the
    user in order to be useful, and yet this conflicts with
    CEN-CENELEC’s current copyright arrangements which state that
    modifications are not permitted.

Additionally, there are opportunities that could be afforded by taking
an “open” approach, eg:

-   Involvement of people not traditionally involved in standardization
    (software developers and other types of design makers) which
    supports diversity and representation objectives

-   Attraction of younger generations of digital experts which improves
    the sustainability of CEN-CENELEC’s business

Finally, this project will align CEN-CENELEC with the European
Commission’s Joint Research Centre’s recommendations to incorporate
“open” principles into standardization.

What is Open Source?
--------------------

Open source is a concept based on being open and transparent in the way
things are designed as well as giving people freedom to use and modify
them.

Back in the day, developers kept their source code secret to prevent
competitors copying them and making money. Today, industry business
models have changed and interoperability is far more important than
protecting secret source code. Indeed, the biggest tech giants have gone
“open” and it is considered to be the way of the future.

Open source projects are characterized by short development times
(release early and often), community-based development, higher quality,
flexibility and a focus on interoperability. The advantages of being
open include many of the usual strengths of in standardization like
consensus, interoperability and peer-reviewed quality. But additionally,
it can:

-   Further enhance innovation – because people don’t need special
    permission to build on existing ideas (I can take your design,
    modify it with my innovative ideas and publish it on my website
    because your licence says I’m allowed to)

-   Keep standards relevant in the digital era – because openness and
    digital solutions are definite societal shifts

Even though open source has become best practice in software
development, it is not only restricted to source code.

Since open source has already become the go-to reference point in some
specific fields, it has become unavoidable. There are different
approaches between open source communities and standard development
organizations (SDOs), but there are also many points in common. It is
now up to us to develop a common strategy on how both worlds can benefit
the most. There are many different ways to be open, and CEN-CENELEC
needs to figure out the way that’s right for its community. Linking
standardization and open source together allows CEN-CENELEC to be part
of driving innovation.

Objectives
==========


The overarching objective of this project is to facilitate the
incorporation open source approaches into CEN-CENELEC’s standardization
activities in order to keep standards relevant in the digital era.
Concretely:

-   By “facilitate”, it is meant that a reusable framework will be set
    up by the project team that can be operated by standards makers; the
    project is not responsible for developing the open source
    products themselves.

-   By “open source approaches”, it is meant that both collaboration and
    usage of the software or other designs will be “open”, including
    compliance with the [Open Source
    Definition](https://opensource.org/osd).

-   By “incorporation… into standardization activities”, it is meant
    that CEN-CENELEC intends to focus its efforts on the link between
    open source and standardization activities; it does not have an
    ambition to become an open source community in the general sense
    (like Linux Foundation, etc) which frequently has no relationship
    with standards.

-   By “keep standards relevant in the digital era”, it is recognized
    that software and other designs increasingly augment the value of
    standards and are becoming essential in the eyes of standards users,
    standards makers and parties that sponsor creation of standards;
    facilitating this will encourage these stakeholders, both new and
    existing, to participate in the CEN-CENELEC ecosystem.

However, this objective is high level. In order to make it actionable,
the project team will progressively refine the details of it throughout
the course of the project.

Approach
========

This is an innovation project, and as such it inherently requires
freedom to progressively explore, define, test and learn. This charter
is therefore built to provide an appropriate balance of formal guidance
versus freedom to explore. In order to manage this:

-   A clear but high-level overarching objective is stated under section
    5 Objectives: a “north star” to make sure the project team is always
    heading in the right direction and begins with the end in mind

-   Key scope questions are highlighted under section 7.3 Key Scope
    Questions to be Resolved

-   The project team is empowered with an appropriate degree of
    authority while ensuring formal yet timely decision making for those
    points that fall outside its authority under section 11 Approval &
    Delegated Authority

Scope
=====

In Scope
--------

-   A minimum viable product (MVP) framework for incorporation of open
    source into standardization activities (see breakdown in section
    7.4 Deliverables)

-   Change management (eg: training, communications, handover to
    operational teams)

Out of Scope
------------

-   Rollout to all technical bodies, members and standards
    users (scaling)

-   Operational execution of the framework

Key Scope Questions to be Resolved
----------------------------------

### Nature & Number of Solutions

Although CEN-CENELEC does not aim to cover every possible scenario, it
does aim to implement the 80:20 rule: sufficiently cover the main
scenarios. However, it is not yet clear exactly what those main
scenarios are. For example, there may be needs for different:

-   Collaborators (software developers/other designers) (eg: experts
    from members, partnership with an open source community,
    independent individuals)

-   Funding arrangements (eg: members, sponsors, collaborators)

-   Levels of recognition (eg: normative, informative)

-   Sequences of events (eg: standard first, open source first)

-   Speeds for creation & maintenance

-   Quality control mechanisms (eg: processes, voting)

-   Etc

These different aspects will lead to different requirements and might
therefore lead to different potential solutions. In any case, if there
is more than one solution, they would all be united under a single MVP
framework which could be used to determine the most appropriate solution
for the scenario at hand.

Analysis and pilots will progressively reveal more information about the
types of scenarios (use cases) that have already been encountered or
expect to be encountered in the future. Based on this, scenarios will be
matched to potential solutions so that a decision can be made about
which potential solution(s) to implement.

When the project team is ready to make a recommendation on this scope
clarification, top level approval will be sought.

Deliverables
------------

This project aims to put a minimum viable product (MVP) framework in
place. This will include:

-   Solution selection:

    -   Requirements (scenarios/use cases)

    -   Validation that solutions address requirements

    -   An operational way to select the most appropriate solution for a
        given scenario

-   For each solution:

    -   IT tools (eg: repository, tools for facilitating processes,
        publication via members)

    -   Legal and commercial arrangements (eg: licensing, funding,
        contracts, partnerships)

    -   Processes and procedures (eg: creation, maintenance, Internal
        Regulations, Guides)

    -   Operationalization (eg: roles, responsibilities, KPIs)

    -   Agile iterations of testing & learning (eg: through prototypes)

    -   An end-to-end test of the complete solution (not just a
        prototype, but something that would be rolled out broadly) in
        production (ie: be successfully live with 1 standard and 1 user)



***[Back to Start Page](EN00000_00_00_00_Start.md)***
